(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.) DRAMATIS
PERSONA King Charles, read by Greg Giordano.
Marquis de Rotondo, read by Algy Pag.
Don Jose, read by Adrian Stevens.
Don Cesar de Bazin, read by Craig Franklin.
Nazarillo, read by Agnes Robert Bear.
Paccolo, read by Jim Hedrick.
Judge, read by Al Mapstone.
Captain of the Guard, read by Stacey M.
Bedros, read by Biswa Skandal.
Lopez, read by Jim Locke.
First Soldier, read by Todd.
Second Soldier, read by Inkel.
First Cavalier, read by Todd.
Second Cavalier, read by Inkel.
Servant, read by David Purdy.
Marchioness de Rotondo, read by Kelly
Taylor.
Maritana, read by Matea Bracic.
Stage Directions, read by Larry Wilson.
Miscellaneous Sound Effects, produced by
Kelly Taylor.
Act 1, Scene 1 A public place in
Madrid.
A group of singers and dancers discovered.
Comrades, tread a merry measure.
Here are those who purchase pleasure.
Dance, sing, dance, sing.
See, already coin and plenty From their
purse since they have sent ye.
Dance, sing, Maritana!
Music Enter Maritana, upper entrance right,
Back of winehouse, gaily dressed as a street
dancer.
The group make way for her.
She is following the king, who is disguised
in a cloak, etc.
He regards her attentively.
Don Jose follows at a distance, watching.
A maravedí, sir?
Only one?
The king takes out his purse.
I have lost the power of charming coin
from purses.
The king drops money in her tambourine And
exits hastily left.
No, no!
What, gold?
A doubloon?
Yes, and yet I feared to approach that
noble cavalier.
He seemed so cross and melancholy.
She turns to group and converses with them,
As though narrating her good fortune.
Don Jose left, looking off.
I was not mistaken.
It is the king.
Thrice I have found him watching this pretty
wench, Seemingly spellbound by her grace and
beauty.
Maritana to the group.
Yes, friends, it is my birthday.
Therefore I devote these pieces to mirth and
revelry.
There!
Throws them money.
Away with you!
I'll join you presently.
Excellent, upper entrance right, into wine
store, All but Maritana and Don Jose.
Music.
Maritana going pauses.
A doubloon?
Neither song nor dance was worth so large
a recompense.
Your good fortune seems to have made you
thoughtful.
Signor!
Oh, no, no!
A golden piece, was it not?
Here is its fellow.
Gives money.
For me?
Yes, pretty one, for you.
Thank you, signor, but...
Well, what fear you?
The influence of this glittering tempter.
Holds up money.
When I was a child, my step was
light, And my song the tuneful echo of
my merry heart.
But now, when the hopes and fears of
womanhood Have made both heart and step less
buoyant than of old, My reward is greater.
Should I not fear?
I do not understand you.
You will not, signor.
Think you that I am a woman and
know not that I am fair?
Men tell me so by words and looks
a hundred times a day.
Think you that I am a woman and
love not the incense That is offered to
my beauty?
Or that I seek not to adorn the
shrine That claims so many worshippers?
Go on, I see no cause for fear.
Again you will not.
The songstress of the street, The mime who
treads the measures for the pleasure of the
crowd, Knows well the worth men set upon
her, signor.
She covets gold to free her from bondage
And grows ambitious of her highest fear.
Each word of praise is as a breath
to fan the sleeping flame.
Each gift is fuel to the growing fire.
Don José aside, The very instrument I need.
Have I not cause to fear the end?
No.
No, when thus I am tempted, Haunted as
I am by a vague pre-sentiment, A
secret hope?
Indeed.
Yes, yes.
Since I attracted the gracious notice of the
Queen, I have thought my ambition no longer
criminal.
Let me be profit of your future fortunes.
Confide in me and all you desire shall
be accomplished.
All accomplished?
I have the power to make your dreams
realities.
Your wish shall be the law of nobles.
Maritana aside and pleasantly excited.
I cannot breathe.
Come, tomorrow shall see you the glory of
Madrid.
Takes her hand.
No, no.
Flourish her left upper entrance.
Shouts within.
Viva, the Queen.
Ah, the Queen.
I will trust alone to her.
Exit left upper entrance.
Indeed, fair maiden, I have mastered more
difficult intrigues than the conquest of a
woman.
The King admires this pretty piece of
fantasy.
The mistress of the King must care for
him who raised her to dignity.
One obstacle alone presents itself.
The humble origin of Maritana.
That must be concealed.
The Queen will learn the wrong she has
sustained and womanlike resent it.
Goes up.
Oh, dare I hope so full a consummation
of my wildest dreams.
A noise within left upper entrance and cries
of down with him.
What tumult's this?
Looks off.
The followers of Maritana.
Ah, she appears amongst them and by her
presence has silenced them.
The object of their anger comes this way.
What strange fantastic fellow have we here?
Enter Don Cesar left upper entrance followed
by a crowd murmuring and Maritana who repels
them and then exits with them right upper
entrance.
The curse.
But that it would have disgraced my sword
I'd have spitted them like larks.
That black scoundrel Stiletto would have
found a sheath in the noble Don Cesar
de Bazin.
But for yon pretty dancing girl, where have
I seen her?
Ah, I remember at Seville when I pinked
a coxcomb who thought that the cherries on
her lips were to be plucked gratis.
Crosses left.
Don Jose aside.
As I lived his Don Cesar de Bazin,
my old college friend at Salamanca.
Don Cesar feeling his pockets.
Not a mervedi.
By the aid of the dice-box the
rogues have cleaned me out as though they
had been noblemen and men of honour.
I must now trust to the air and
the sky for board and lodging.
Well, my supper will be light and my
room airy.
Am I mistaken in addressing you as Don
Cesar de Bazin?
Er, no, signor.
What, Don Jose de Santarem?
Don Jose giving his hand.
The same.
Don Cesar aside.
His doublet is of three-pile velvet.
What can he want with me?
When last we met you were young and
prosperous.
Ah, you perceive the alteration.
Looks at his dress.
But I was always fond of change.
You inherited a noble name and a princely
fortune.
True, I've preserved the one and spent the
other.
Is my name of any service to you?
Why, thank you, no.
I had hoped you would have done great
things, Don Cesar.
So I have, if you doubt me.
Ask my creditors.
I thought your father paid your debts when
you quitted Salamanca.
So he did, worthy soul, so he did.
But then, from the force of habit, I
acquired new ones.
You have paid somewhat dearly for a life
of pleasure.
Possibly, though I have freed myself now
from all anxieties.
I've no money, so I'm not teased by
poor relations.
I've no lands, so I'm without grumbling
tenantry.
I've no particular destination, so never
take a wrong turning.
I've nothing to support but my sword.
Points to broken scabbard.
And that keeps a sharp lookout for itself.
Why have you visited Madrid, Don Cesar,
tenderly?
Madrid, my native city, why have I revisited
thee?
But for the hope, Don José, the sweet
though foolish hope, that I should there
find I had lost all.
Ay, all.
Pauses and covers his face.
Crosses right.
Your follies?
No, all my creditors.
But I was deceived.
Creditors never die.
Their number is increased.
Indeed?
How?
Most of them have children.
Creditors will have children, heirs to their
ledgers.
And the amounts of my debts will mingle
with their earliest recollections.
What plans have you got for profit?
None.
I've not wherewithal.
Shows empty pockets.
To make stakes with a street beggar.
Your enjoyments, then, will be few, for
pleasure is costly.
I must content me with what I can
get.
A brisk quarrel is easily procured, so I
will amuse myself with fighting.
Crosses left.
There, too, fortune is against you.
How?
The carnival week commences today, and the
king has issued an edict making it death
to engage in a duel.
What?
Death for the thrust of a sword?
How human nature has degenerated!
Nay, the restriction is but for one week,
the carnival week.
You will have the rest of the year
to enjoy yourself.
A whole week?
It is hard for one who has nothing
but a hot temper to warm his thin
blood.
But you, who are, by the by, Don
José, what are you?
I?
I am nothing.
Nothing?
Then we are still on an equality.
Enter Lazario and Parcolo, a water-carrier.
Left second entrance.
They get centre.
Nay, Signior Lazario, do not spurn my good
offices.
You have been cruelly used.
That's the truth, aunt.
Thank you, comrade, thank you.
Think me not proud or ungrateful.
I have but one desire, and that is
to die.
Crosses left.
Don José muses aside.
To die before your beard grows?
Ay, sir, he would drown himself.
How?
Drown?
In water?
Exchange this bright and lovely earth for
muddy water?
The thought, aunt, gives one the ague.
At your age to wish for death, you,
you can't be plagued by creditors.
No, Signior, I am an apprentice to the
armourer, who has in charge of the aqua
-buses or the royal guards.
Well, there's no reason that you should
drown yourself.
No, Signior, but this morning, under the
pretext that the arms were neglected, the
captain ordered me to receive fifty lashes.
Don Cesar indignantly.
Fifty?
It was not the number, Signior.
I do not mind suffering, but one blow
is too much to bear.
Don Cesar crosses to Don José right.
The boy is a true Spaniard, familiarly.
We, we must speak in his favour, Don
José.
My lieutenant interceded for me, but in
vain, Signior.
Possibly, but he will not refuse the request
of such noble advocates as ourselves.
Takes Don José's arm.
Don José.
Pardon me.
Releasing his arm gently.
But at present there are reasons for my
non-interference.
Oh, very well.
Then the boy must be dependent upon my
influence alone.
Footsteps heard.
Lazzarillo looks off left upper entrance.
Ah, I am pursued.
I shall be again degraded.
Going.
Stay.
Place yourself behind me.
We will defend you.
We?
Don Cesar bows.
Yes, Don Cesar and his sword.
About to draw.
You forget the royal edict.
The about to utter an imprecation removes
his hat.
But it is the carnival week.
Trumpet.
Enter captain and soldiers, left second
entrance.
They cross it back to right.
There is your prisoner.
Secure him.
Points to Lazzarillo.
Don Cesar interfering humbly.
One moment, captain.
Allow me, suffer me to humbly intercede for
this young delinquent.
Captain to soldiers, who pause, and not
regarding Don Cesar.
Soldiers, why do you pause?
The soldiers advance.
Oh, mercy, captain, mercy.
You do not hear him, captain.
The poor lad soothes for mercy.
Let me.
Uncovering.
Join with him in supplicating pardon.
Captain to Lazzarillo.
Back to your duty, sirrah.
I heed neither your tears nor the mouthings
of this saddish mummer.
Don Cesar indignantly.
What?
Recollecting himself.
That cursed edict.
Oh, if it were not the hanging week.
Calmly.
But, captain, if he returns no blows.
See, tears, they are not easily wrung from
so brave a heart.
Captain crosses right.
Pardon, captain.
Detains him by the cloak.
Captain snatching it away.
Unhand me.
Take stage right.
Don Cesar indignantly.
Dare.
Recollecting.
Oh, that edict, that cursed edict.
Don Jose aside to Don Cesar.
Centre and going up.
Hard words, Don Cesar.
Don Cesar to captain.
One word more.
You are a gentleman and a soldier.
So am I.
I have pledged my honour to protect this
boy, you understand.
I have soothed, implored you to forgive.
Crosses round to right with Lazzarillo.
You have my answer.
Crosses left.
No.
What I solicited in vain, I must now
compel.
Insolent.
Enough.
In spite of the royal edict, I must
have the amende, my noble captain.
How?
With my sword, which will ennoble yours by
the contact.
I am Don Cesar de Bazan.
Replacing his hat.
Count de Garofa, possessing the right to
remain covered in the presence of the king.
I have soothed you, humbly soothed you, and
you have insulted me and the royal edict.
Draws.
A challenge.
Yes, which you will accept if you have
either shame or courage.
You shall not doubt the latter.
Follow me and receive the proof.
Exit left upper entrance.
Lazzarillo right.
You fight for me.
Oh no.
I will return, Don Cesar.
Don Cesar right of centre.
You shall, my gallant lad, to your
lieutenant, who would have spared you the
ignominy of a blow.
Be patient, and in ten minutes I will
make him a captain.
Excellent Albert Don José left upper
entrance.
Don Cesar was the best swordsman in Madrid.
Should he retain his cunning, my plans will
soon have a happy consummation.
The edict enforced.
Don Cesar's reckless nature will make him
the easy means of Maritana's advancement.
Ah, here comes the fair enslaver of the
king.
Enter Maritana left.
She wears a scarf of gaudy colours.
Again the queen has smiled upon me.
It is no idle fantasy that fills my
brain.
Some lucky accident may place me at the
height of my ambition.
Si, Don José.
Ah, señor.
I would fain know what pleasant thoughts
give birth to such bright smiles, Maritana.
The queen, señor, the queen.
You see, I have not been a niggard
of your gift.
She holds a scarf.
And you think yourself rich in the
possession of such a trifle?
Confide in me and ere long the gayest
lady of the court shall yield to you
in splendour.
Dare not listen to you.
I dare not trust the longing of my
heart.
Wherefore?
My roving life has taught me truth beyond
the common experience of my years.
I have seen the rich man's idol of
today the outcast of tomorrow.
No, no.
Mournfully.
My destiny is known to me.
You do not believe your own prophecies.
You may gull the dullards who bribe you
to promise fortune, but you know yourself a
cheat.
I will show you my skill in palmistry.
Takes her hand.
Tomorrow you shall be a countess.
Maritana delighted.
A countess.
Pauses.
A countess but in name.
By right of honourable alliance.
You know me not, or you would not
doubt my power to realise the hopes I
have awakened.
You rescued but now a stranger from the
extortions of your band.
Yes, yes.
He saved me from insult, but I repaid
the debt I owed him.
Though now a ruined spendthrift, he is of
noble lineage.
He loves you, Maritana.
Maritana appears affected.
Indeed, señor.
I have promised to be his advocate.
Should you consent to share his name and
fortunes, I will restore him to position.
Have you the power?
Don José, the favourite minister of Charles
of Spain, could do much more.
And you are?
Don José, commissioned by the Queen to raise
Maritana to the rank she covets.
Indeed.
Then I have not dreamed.
I have not trusted to phantom hopes.
Before tomorrow, I will prove their reality.
Murmurs heard.
Maritana appears overpowered.
Don José looks off aside.
Ah, fortune befriends me.
Don César is the victor, and already in
the hands of the Algazils.
Music is heard.
Aloud.
Your hand, fair lady.
Let me lead you to your honours.
Excellent right.
Four Algazils enter, conducting Don César.
Lazarelle follows, weeping.
The crowd of dancers, etc., appear by
gesture to taunt Don César.
He walks proudly.
An officer and twelve soldiers enter from
opposite side.
Soldiers march round and clear crowd back
right and left, and go off with Don
César, upper entrance right.
Crowd taunting him at end of course.
Six soldiers cross from upper entrance left
to right, down stage.
Six ditto down left meet and charge crowd
up and range right and left.
All excellent upper entrance right at end of
course.
Clock chimes and strikes five at change of
scene.
Scene two.
A prison.
Doors right and left.
Clock at work.
A table and stools.
Enter Pedro right and López left.
Good news.
The royal idiot has sent you a prisoner.
Good news truly.
It is now a week since I had
the pleasure of turning a key upon anyone
but my wife.
But are you sure the news is true?
True.
I saw the jewel.
I saw the hot-blooded raffler in the
presence of the Alcad, who has been idle
too long to let a chance escape him.
Si.
Here comes the prisoner.
Enter Don César and Lázaro right.
Two Alguazils and two soldiers appear at the
door.
And all excellent but Don César and Lázaro.
Arrested.
Tried and condemned.
All within an hour.
He has but two hours to live.
Don César looking at clock.
Two hours more.
How the deuce am I to pass my
time?
I shall die of ennui.
Takes a chair and sits left of centre.
Pause.
If you were in my place and had
a couple of hours before you, how would
you employ them?
In recalling the hours of my past life.
What, in two hours?
You must be very ignorant of my biography.
Recall my past errors?
No, there is no time for that.
I'll make my will.
No, that would not consume two minutes.
Oh, señor.
Taking his hand and sobbing.
I have been the cause of this.
It is for me you are about to
die.
Is there no service by which I can
show my regret?
My gratitude?
Yes, you can oblige me materially.
Oh, how, say how?
Clinging to his hand.
By showing little more regard for my lace
ruffle.
See how you've torn it?
Alas, is there no one to entreat your
pardon from the king?
No one has yet pleaded for you.
Nay, boy, all are not so indifferent to
my fate.
There was one venerable old man who threw
himself in the path of the king regardless
of the wheels of the royal carriage or
the hooves of the royal mules.
He stretched forth his trembling hands while
tears bedewed his aged cheeks and in accents
broken by emotion he implored, Pardon,
pardon for Don Caesar.
Ah, it was the old count, your father.
No, it was one of my creditors.
See how wrong you were.
What of all your noble friends and
companions?
Not one has come to visit you.
A mark of their good feeling, Mauricio.
Don José enters.
To see me in my present position would
be more than they could bear.
So out of kindness they keep away.
Don José coming down right.
Accepting me.
Don José.
Lazarillo exit right door at a sign from
You seem surprised.
You wrong me.
I was always your friend.
And do I not prove my sincerity by
coming to you when all is over?
If your friendship was to be of any
practical service you might have made your
visit a little earlier.
But I confess if I had looked for
sympathy yours would have been the last I
should have expected.
I may yet be in time to serve
you.
You have but two hours to live.
I beg your pardon.
Looking at clock, which now is a quarter
past five.
It is an hour and three quarters.
The error is of no consequence, but we
may as well be right when we can,
for life is very short.
Yours may be long enough to enable us
to understand each other.
Come, let us sit.
I wish to speak with you.
With pleasure.
They sit.
For my time is all your own.
Well then, Don Cesar.
Well, Don José.
If I had it in my power to
grant any demand what would be your dying
request?
My dying request?
To live, to be sure.
As the king's favourite minister, and as
your friend, if you will accept the
conditions I am about to propose I swear
to grant whatever you ask, always accepting
life.
That I cannot promise.
It's awkward, as that happens to be almost
the only thing I'm likely shortly to want.
Is there nothing else?
Nothing.
Stay, you saw a boy.
Did you not, as you entered?
The one to whom you owe your present
position?
Yes, I believe I do owe him that,
but I owe something to everybody.
I should not like him to be at
the mercy of the world when I am
gone.
Will you assist him?
Yes, I will provide for him.
That is kind.
I will pay you beforehand with a thousand
thanks.
Have you nothing else to ask, consider?
No, I think that's all.
Don José aside.
He will never exceed my plan for such
a trifling recompense.
Allowed.
Don Cesar, have you thought of the manner
of your death?
Yes, I know all.
Rises.
A rope.
Would that death come my sword or arquebus,
but a rope.
Yes, I think I have one request, Don
José.
Name it.
I would bequeath the gallows to my
creditors, but let me dispatched by the
arquebuses of a dozen brave fellows.
In short, let me die like a gentleman.
You shall have your wish.
You will not deceive?
I swear it on the honour of a
soldier.
You give me new life.
That is to say, you have taken away
half the inconvenience of death, if I
receive it at the hands of brave men.
I should like to drink with the worthy
fellows.
Drink with them?
You, the Count de Besan?
I've drunk in worse company o' this.
Besides, if I am their superior now, they
will soon have the advantage of me.
You promised to grant my wish.
And I will.
A banquet shall be prepared for you that
shall recall the revels of past times.
Is that all?
Yes, that's all.
And now for your conditions.
What do you require of me?
Both sit down.
Not much for a man in your position.
I simply require you to marry.
Clock now at half-past five.
Hmm.
To marry?
I don't see the use of that.
What can be the good of it for
an hour and a half?
That is a mystery.
A mystery indeed.
It can't be for my fortune, because I
have nothing to leave, except my debts and
my name.
Ah.
My name has still some value.
I see it all.
Some woman wishes to be called a countess.
Is it not so?
It may be.
Well, she shall have it.
It is nothing to me.
I want to fill up my time.
Marriage is an occupation, and one may be
as good as another.
It's for so short a time.
We can't have many matrimonial differences.
You agree to confer the title of countess
to Garofa?
Together with my interest in the county of
Garofa, if you can find I have any
remaining.
But by the by.